Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Cole Moore. Our usual co-host, Kyle, has the day off today because, of course, we have a podcast guest. And boy, do we have a guest. I know why you're tuning in. So before we get to that, I'm going to ask, of course, that you please subscribe to the podcast wherever you listen to your podcasts. And if you haven't yet given us a five-star rating and you think we deserve it, please give us one. We really, really appreciate that. We have quite a few now. It goes a long way.
going to be sharing it with your friends with a couple kind words, or also sharing it on a forum. And when we see that, we really, really appreciate it. It doesn't cost you any money to do that kind of stuff, but if you do have a couple bucks you would like to send our way, you can send it to empiricalcycling.com slash donate.
for a couple donation options. And of course, if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, that is the ultimate Patreon for us because we don't actually have one. So if you want to hire us to coach you or you want to hire us for a consultation, now's a good time to do it, getting ready for next year, wrapping up the previous year. Our time is your time. We can talk about training concepts. We can look at your files. We can help you plan out the next season. We can help you figure out strengths and limiters and race strategies and all kinds of stuff.
We are here to help you. So reach out, empiricalcycling at gmail.com, of course. And of course, if you have any questions or comments, shoot me an email to the same address. And of course, we've got the show notes up on the website at empiricalcycling.com. We do have a couple notes from today. We talk about a couple papers. And we've got links to all that kind of stuff. And of course...
We almost got to listener questions in this episode. Listener questions asked up on the Instagram. That is at Empirical Cycling, of course. And so we've got the weekend AMAs up in the Instagram stories. And during the week, whenever we record, I usually ask people to ask us additional questions on that kind of stuff. So we get to listen to questions. And Andy and I talked for about an hour 45.
and we didn't quite get any listener questions. It was on the list, but he had to run and he was already so generous with his time. I didn't want to try to take up any more, but he is also such a nice guy. He volunteered to do another podcast. He volunteered for it. I didn't ask him for it. So Andy Coggan, thank you so much for being so generous with your time and being such a good conversationalist. I had a great time talking with you and you know what? I think
We touch on a lot of stuff in this podcast that I think a lot of people have been curious about with Andy over the last couple of years. You know, his social media presence, he's well aware of his online persona and, you know, all that kind of stuff. We touch on that. Well, we kind of do a little more than touch on it. We kind of go deep into his social media presence or lack of it these days.
And we, you know, talk about his motivations for his research. We talk about his, some of his previous research. We don't quite get into his current stuff on beetroot juice, although we are going to talk about it next time. I have a bunch of stuff that we never quite got to from this episode because each topic, you know, it really, really went to a lot of different areas. And, you know, we do talk about, you know, the hour and FTP as a concept and thresholds and all that kind of stuff.
You know, we also go into VLA Max and its utility or not, as it were. And we, you know, we talk about the history of exercise physiology. He's written a couple chapters and books on exactly that. And, you know, I think this was probably, every podcast I say this, probably one of my favorite conversations I've ever had. But, you know, it's Andy Coggan, so it's hard to top.
All right. I know you're sick of me rambling already. So am I. So without any further ado, let's get right into this interview, and I will see you on the other side. How are you doing? By the way, congratulations. That was a great chapter on the history of exercise metabolism. I thought it was fantastic reading. Oh, thanks. Yeah. I know Glenn McConnell going way back. Originally, he had asked Dave Costell to write that chapter.
Dave said yes, and then he decided he didn't have the energy, and then he said no, so I seem to have become the go-to guy, because I had gray hair, but I'd previously written a much lengthier chapter on the history of exercise metabolism for Charles Tipton's book, and so it's a bit of a struggle. It's like, how do you write the same history and not plagiarize yourself?
Designed copyright to the original publisher. Was that the 2014 reference that came up a couple times? Yes. Let's see if it shows up. Oh, yeah. It's a really cool book, and actually, that's one of the figures that I've always loved. I used it in my chapter, and then I was thrilled when they put it on the cover. Oh, man, yeah. That's so great.
So it's much lengthier, and I had to figure out, okay, how do I condense all of this down and say it a different way? And I had fun with the military analogies in there, right? Yeah. Well, because I think the history of exercise physiology is something that I've always been fascinated by.
You know, the autobiography from Hans Krebs. I've read Herzog's Reflections in Muscle Physiology and stuff like that. And I love all those. Well, I wouldn't even say they're old manuscripts. But I think there's a 10,000-foot view that happens when you write about the research instead of the research itself. Do you have a 10,000-foot view of your own research that maybe you'd want to turn into a book someday? Because I'd read it.
No, actually, that's probably one of my weaknesses, my personality trait, as I tend to be narrow and hyperly focused. It gets me into trouble. I dive deep into writing a paper, and I assume that readers will have the necessary background, and then they don't. And my bad for not realizing that, et cetera. Well, I think actually that...
That sounds familiar in a lot of ways, because I started this podcast as kind of an advertisement for my coaching services. And it forces me to engage the audience in a way that I cannot assume that they have a certain level of background knowledge. And we've gone into glycolysis, and we've gone into beta-oxidation, we've gone into the carnitine shuttle, and we've gone into all sorts of stuff.
listened to the podcast episode several times. It's like a biochem lecture. And I'm surprised that they're interested, but I think it's great because I think in a lot of ways, it does show that there is a hunger for this kind of education, at least. Have you found the same over the years? Yeah, there definitely is. There aren't many places out there, unfortunately, that are doing a really good job, in my opinion. And of course, that's just a...
Practical Reality. There aren't very many people who are both knowledgeable on a topic and paid and willing to engage with the public and can do so in a good manner. But speaking of podcasts, again, Glenn McConnell, he is now a professor emeritus from Victoria University, and he's decided to start a podcast. Really? It's called Inside Exercise, but he's going around and interviewing.
Exercise Physiologist, and kind of giving an insider's view of the field. And it's only started, I think, the first, I was his first guest, and he only launched it, I don't know, six weeks ago, two months ago, or whatever. He's got a long list of names signed up for it. So it might be something you would find interesting. Oh, absolutely. I mean, because I think a lot of the training podcasts out there
They don't want to go as deep, I think, because you get a lot broader of an audience that way. And I'd rather make myself happy and have fewer people listen. Like my last interview episode is doing terribly. It also like only half went up to platforms. I don't know what happened. More technological shenanigans, I guess.
But I thought it was my favorite interview I had ever done up to this point. Although, to be honest, I was so nervous about you coming on because, you know, you've been this giant looming over the cycling training world for such a long time. The man behind the curtain. Yeah, you're the man behind the curtain. I like being the man behind the curtain. Although, you know, I think if we...
You know, if we dig into like the old slow twitch forums and, you know, the old wattage forum and everything, you know, there was a, you know, a long in-depth look at the man behind the curtain back in those days. Yeah, I remember back in the, you know, rec sport triathlon and rec bicycle racing days, running my mouth on the web. So, you know, I'm a man with an opinion, no doubt.
The interesting thing is how that's led the world at large to have a very distorted view of me. You know, I get people who assume I'm either an applied sports scientist or I won't say worse, but more incorrectly that I'm a coach. No offense taken. Yeah. I mean, well, it's a worse mistake on their part. But, you know.
I always describe myself as an exercise physiologist, and then within that context, since I spent the vast majority of my career on soft money in medical schools, chasing NIH dollars, I've written many more grants than I have papers, and very little of my research directly hits upon sports performance. So everything I've put forth into the world is more as a hobbyist.
Right, yeah. And then people just think that I'm, you know, who do you coach? Like, nobody. I mean, that was, I record the intros and outros for these episodes separately, and that was one of the things I was going to mention, is that you are distinctly not a coach. Because I remember back in the WQO4 days, which is how, you know, right when I started coaching, I was a little late for the WQO3 stuff. But I remember you,
You know, you were telling a story about your wife as a pursuiter and doing a couple different, you know, training things. And, you know, you had distinctly mentioned, I am not a coach. I am not training her. But I think, well, I do want to ask you about that a little later because I think that's a fascinating story. But I think one of the things that, where was I going with this? Hold on one second.
I have not had enough coffee today. Let's see. Oh, yeah. You know, I think a lot of people might be forgiven for mistaking you for being a coach because, you know, you've built so many tools that, you know, cyclists of all levels use to train. So, you know, I mean, I thought you were a coach at first, too, until I heard that you weren't. And then I, you know, started reading your research and I was like, oh, okay.
Do you think that being not a coach helped you develop tools like, you know, CTL and TSB and FTP and things like that? No, not necessarily. You know, I've been studying exercise physiology since 1976.
And I started riding a bike in 1974 and racing in 75. So I was a cyclist before I was an exercise physiologist. While I have never had a desire to coach people or any experience coaching people, I obviously, though, have, you know, deep roots in cycling.
Asked a couple times to consult in the world of rowing and assist people get up to speed with rowing power and develop tools and this kind of stuff. And I found it quite challenging because I'm not a rower. So I couldn't intuitively and personally relate to things. Whereas in cycling, I do have the cycling background. And so the applications there are, you know.
come far more naturally to me. I mean, have you ever wanted to, you know, to write more on the, you know, kind of training physiology, you know, crossover, like how to bridge the two? Not especially. You know, one of the things about, like even our training and racing with a power meter, this was an idea of Hunter Allen's. He says, we should write a book. We were at a,
USA Cycling Coaching webinar, seminar in person, actually, in Boston. And Hunter and I were sharing a hotel room, and he's like, you know, we should write a book. And that's a great idea. Grabbed the laptop, we mapped out the outline of the book, you know, ideas are flying left, right, and center very quickly. But then it took a couple years before it finally found a home. And then it actually became the work of writing the book.
which just makes the publishers a bunch of money. So my only contributions to any editions of our book were all the ideas and then like recycling blog posts or lengthy answers I'd put into web forums or that kind of thing. I did very little writing, which is why Hunter is the first author on all the books. I mean, writing, you know, writing on anything is...
It's work. And I've got plenty of writing already to do. I just sent you a copy of my CV. Oh, cool. And you'll see in there, I've written far more grants than I have papers. And while the success rate on the grants is reasonably good, it still means you've written an awful lot of grants that don't get funded. Yeah. And, you know, an NIH grant, it's like, well, you got to generate maybe, you know.
13 pages of actual text. And then it ends up being padded out with all of the government forms, et cetera, to being 150 page grant. So many months to put it together and it's, you know, you're drilling dry holes. So the notion of writing a book to make a publisher money? Yeah, not so much. I mean, you know, we could at least, or, well, you could at least publish it yourself electronically and
Yeah, that seems to be the route that a lot of people are going. I've bought a lot of books that look really, really interesting on all sorts of exercise topics. And I'd say like one in five, it was like probably worth getting. But I think that's kind of what a publisher can weed out a little bit sometimes.
Right. When Hunter and I wrote that book, we contemplated just self-publishing something. Obviously, you know, you could sell it for less and make more money. But ultimately, we decided that, you know, doing it the traditional route was best because it would give a broader platform, get the word out about it. And Renee Hardeen was our editor on the first and second edition.
And for the second edition especially, she did a fantastic job because Hunter and I have very disparate writing styles. And then she had to somehow weave those together so that, you know, when you're reading the text, you don't come to a screeching halt and say, okay, that was the part that Hunter wrote. Now clearly this is the part that Coggan wrote. Yeah. So she did a fantastic job.
I think she did too, because after having read so many of your research papers, I can kind of recognize, you know, what I would assume to be about your style. And, you know, and that's the kind of thing of like, you know, reading, I don't know, Supreme Court justices. I hear people can do that kind of thing, figure out their writing style, but like, yeah, she did a great job because the first time I read that back in, I don't know, 2008 or something like that, I couldn't tell. But, you know, on the subject of education, actually, I was curious.
You know, if you or Hunter maybe thought that, you know, if the book had been published, you know, like in 2015, instead of, you know, way back when it was, you know, would you have done more like follow-up education with it, kind of the way that Tim does with WTO? Hunter might have, you know, I had, I never had any desire to have an alternative career.
to academia. So, you know, there are things beyond the message and the medium at play that maybe wouldn't have made that possible. But, I mean, Hunter certainly, one year in particular, I think he told me he spent 250 years, 250 days on the road giving talks.
And a lot of it was people were familiar with Hunter Allen, the cycling coach, because he wrote the book. So it didn't come out necessarily in a FAQs or videos or, you know, but he was certainly attempting to educate the entire world via multiple avenues. Yeah.
How do you feel about how a lot of the, because I know that you've talked a lot about how training levels were descriptive, not prescriptive.
You know, definitions of FTP, like the wording in the book. Did you anticipate any misinterpretation of that? Because I went back and I looked in the third edition, which I haven't read thoroughly, but I looked at a couple of key spots and I was wondering if some of the phrasing had changed and it hadn't. Had you thought about maybe adjusting some of the language to match things like TTE and whatnot? There was some of that in the third edition to try and...
address people's misconceptions. You know, a lot of the misconceptions have been driven by, you know, a handful of individuals who are vociferous on the web and, you know, they like to find somebody to attack. And of course, if you're prominent, you're going to end up with detractors. A lot of the misconception as well is it's, you know, really, I think...
reflects the success of the ideas or their penetration. It's like everybody wants to jump on the FTP bandwagon and attract athletes to coach because they present themselves as being on top of the latest and the greatest. But in the process, they distort the message. And then somebody else picks it up from them.
And the first, you know, it's like, it's like the party game where you tell the story and it goes around the circle. And by the time it comes back to you, it's completely altered, you know. So in some cases, it's been people who have ulterior motives. And in other cases, it's simply because it's second, third, fourth, fifth, you know, ninth hand, whatever. I mean, as examples of that, I was, I was.
Just before we met here, I came across an article on, was it Zwift Insider or something, where they referred to me as sort of the grandfather of FTP. I mean, they're familiar with FTP, but...
You know, they came into the sport later, and they're not really entirely certain where the idea originated, and they can't necessarily track down the history, so they want to tip their hat and give me credit, but they don't want to be wrong, so they sort of, right? And then also, currently, on a web forum, on Slow Twitch forum, there's a thread that somebody started where the title is along the lines, is power from a 40KTT a valid estimate of FTP?
I mean, wasn't that one of your original estimations? That was the original basis of it. So it just shows you how much, you know, as time goes on, the message gets watered down, changed, etc. Well, I think also there's just so much information out there for people to read, and, you know, a lot of it is not, you know, the original.
Derivations of this kind of thing, because, you know, you and Coyle were using, like, MLSS or basically FTP in a lot of your studies, like, you know, way back in the day. Power of power. Yeah. Yeah. And I went back and I was thinking, like, oh, obviously this is where FTP came from. I always laugh when people say, you know, FTP isn't real. It's like, FTP existed ever before I, you know, pinned a label on it. And in fact, that was
The reason FTP had to be or was coined, really, it's a pedagogical construct. How do you explain to coaches and athletes concepts related to exercise physiology? They've all heard of lactate threshold. Well, there's 20-plus definitions of lactate threshold in the scientific literature. The scientists themselves can't agree exactly how to define it.
That information gets distorted as what makes its way out to the practitioners, the coaches and athletes. What they intuitively know is there's a certain kind of fuzzy line. If I cross that line, I know my time is limited and then the gorilla is going to jump on my back. But if I stay below that, I'm okay.
So I've heard people refer to this as coach's threshold, right? Well, that happens to correspond to maximal lactate steady state, maximal metabolic steady state, any of a million different terms in the scientific literature, whereas many of the definitions of lactate threshold are...
You know, the first increase in blood lactate, a significantly lower intensity. So you have athletes going to the laboratory and they're told their lactate threshold is 170 watts and they know they can do 220 watts for a 40 KTT and they're left scratching their heads, right? Yeah. So my attempt to solve that problem was to tell people, forget about lactate. We got power. Let's just focus on the power data.
You know, and try and express these ideas in terms and words, you know, that you can relate to sort of thing. Yeah, no, I 100% agree. And I mean, in some ways, I would actually argue that FTP is more real than a concept like even critical power. Well, that's... I'm baiting you with that one, to be fair. Yeah, I think you're baiting me with a lot of stuff.
I saw a post just today. People are going, well, you know, FTP isn't physiological like critical power. It's like, okay, you're expressing performance under some conditions in terms of a power output in watts. The exact value you get depends upon the particulars of how you do the testing.
Why is CP real and FTP is not? Especially since CP is FTP, right? Yeah. I mean, fundamentally, they're looking for the same concept. Yeah. And CP has kind of evolved. CP has been evolved by people like Poole and Andy Jones to try and be what FTP has always been, right? Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, that's... I kind of view FTP as like this overarching umbrella.
Mm-hmm. And then under that, you could find, you know, critical power, maximal lactate steady state, you know, ventilatory threshold, the NERS breakpoint, you know, et cetera. More science, science-y, detailed concepts, but as they are more rigorously constrained, they also
like start to separate from each other. Yeah. You say critical power, it's like, well, okay, now, classically, that means you got to do multiple tests, you got to apply a mathematical model, what mathematical model, what duration of tests, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, whereas FTP is a broader, more overarching concept. Yeah. We used to, on the waters list, we used to have pithy power proverbs. I remember those, yeah.
The joke, the behind-the-scenes joke was we were going to come up with a 365-page book with pithy power proverbs, one for every day of the year, that's going to sit on your toilet tank. So when you're using the restroom on your board, you pull one through there, right? But one of the pithy power proverbs, and it's kind of deep, but I like analogies. It was...
It comes back to how you define FTP. It's not exactly 60 minutes. It never has been exactly 60 minutes, right? So squiggle for approximately, squiggle 40 kilometer power or one hour, squiggle one hour power is the FTP as S is the sigma.
Population out there, it has a variance. You can't sample every member of the population, therefore you never know the variance. You can only estimate it from a sample. Well, you never know FTP, but there are lots of ways that you can get a good estimate because it's a concept. I mean, it's so convenient, too, that we have power. I would actually say that
You know, it's the concept that exercise physiology had been looking for for so long, ever since the, you know, pretty much the, you know, probably since Hill had all looking for, you know, what's this threshold over which we fatigue faster and under which we fatigue slower? And even beyond that, application of all kinds of knowledge from exercise physiology, at least in the...
In the world of cycling, where power is fairly easy to measure, the invention, development of the power meter SRM by Uli Schrober really opened the gateway there. And of course, that was their tagline back, they'd have the SRM van out in Colorado, SRM, we make your bike a mobile ergometer. That's great. And it wasn't...
It was really, I got a chance to use an SRM, courtesy of my friend Jim Martin, in 1995. At the time, an SRM cost as much as a good racing bike. So I loved it, the idea of having the data, but I couldn't justify the cost. And then PowerTap came out a year or two later, and I was a, they called it pilot user, beta tester for them. And that's my entry into the
Power-Based Training World. Do you think that other sports will find a revolution in training if and when they're all able to measure power? I made very depending upon the sport. I was a consultant for the Stride Foot Pod.
My interest in that was to make a play on SRM's tagline, and as Steve McGregor kind of put it, Stride could claim, you know, we make your body a mobile biomechanics lab. Now, the guys behind that are two...
Very successful scientists, electrical engineers who get the research funding from National Science Foundation. But they're also runners. And they said, well, how can we apply our knowledge out there? In their case, their knowledge is in microelectronics and low energy consumption, that kind of thing. And they tried for many years to sell a foot pod that...
turned you into a mobile biomechanics lab. And the problem was that your average runner had a hard time wrapping their mind around it. And then they looked around and they said, boy, power is really catching on in the cycling world. We can calculate running power. What if we presented one number? Power. But running is a sport where the environment is...
For competition is generally a bit more narrow than in cycling. I describe something like cycling or cross-country skiing as like free-range activities. You go up hills, you go down mountains in all kinds of weather, etc. Whereas distance runners don't care about sprinting. Sprinters don't care about running long distances. A cyclist often has to do both. And if you want to do a structured workout.
As a runner, well, I can go to the track and I can run in circles with a stopwatch. So I don't think running is necessarily going to be revolutionized by power. Do you think that cycling was ripe for it because of the variety, you know, the free-rangeness of, you know, and the variety of...
You know, races? Like, you know, we've got to sprint, we've got to, you know, accelerate repeatedly, we've got to go for hours or, you know, four minutes. Yeah, I think so. My son's a swimmer, and so I start thinking about similarities and differences across various sports. And, you know, even as a cyclist myself, I had no exposure to track cycling until I, or limited exposure to track cycling. It's not that popular. There aren't as many velodromes around.
Until I met my wife. And then you kind of realize that if all you ever do is road cycling or gravel or mountain bike or something like that, it's like going to the Olympics and, you know, only watching the marathon on the road and not going into the stadium to watch the track and field events. You know, you really need the track cycling and BMX all the way out to Grand Tours to kind of get the entire span. Yeah, yeah. At the same time, we have...
So many different events in cycling, a lot of different body types can be successful. And then you have drafting, which means even in the same race, right? Whereas if you line everybody up for the marathon, you know, there's not going to be very many people who are 200 pounds at the pointy end of the field, right? So I think cycling is, I don't know if it was ripe for it, but it certainly means that there's a broad swath.
of applications or potential. Yeah. Let's see, what do I want to ask you next? Because I have a lot of really kind of related things here. Actually, I think a lot of people are going to want me to ask you on the about an hour thing. I'm sure you've tackled this a thousand times, so I apologize for asking you one more. I think when you say about an hour, a lot of people figure like 55 to
65 minutes, something like that, that kind of range. But if we're talking like a 40K time trial, our very own coach, Cory Lockwood, just broke the national record under 45 minutes for 40K. And I also think that in that respect, I think that's where further education with WKO5 has actually done a lot more to retroactively
You know, help and be like, oh, look, see, Andy was kind of right all along, as you so frequently have been. Yeah, you know, my, as you mentioned earlier, doing my dissertation with Ed Coyle, who's very interested in performance, we obviously did a lot of lactate testing and performance testing and looking at determinants of performance, you know, etc. So that was my background.
Back in the day, I had probably read every English language article there was on lactate threshold. So that was my perspective on things, and I've always viewed FTP as a functional surrogate for something like maximal lactate steady state. And in an endurance-trained individual, maximal lactate steady state is an intensity that can be maintained for
40 to 70 minutes. On average, you can go back and pull various studies, etc. But it does seem that the fitter you are, the longer you can maintain it. If you're an untrained individual, perhaps only 30 minutes. But FTP is for competitive cyclists, trained individuals, right? So we know we're going to be shading toward the long end of that duration.
Then you sit there and you look at the shape of the exercise intensity duration relationship. And it's, you know, a very shallow slope. So if you're talking about the difference between 45 minutes for, you know, the new national TT record or cat four who takes an hour and five to do his, you know, state 40K TT, the difference is a few percent in terms of the power output.
Is that why in WKO5 we have a log scale so we can actually see it a lot better? That was actually Kevin Williams and Hunter Allen when they were developing what evolved into the original WKO software. I met Hunter and Kevin at a USA Cycling, the very first meeting on power-based training in Philadelphia. I was one of the speakers along with
Dean Golich, and who is behind Scratch Labs. Oh, Alan Lim. Alan Lim. We were the three speakers. Hunter was there because he saw power-based training as the coming thing and had athletes who'd gotten power taps, wanted to know more about it. Kevin was one of the athletes he was coaching who had a power tap. So they literally went away at the lunch break and said, okay, this is Hunter's thinking, right?
Chris Carmichael is the guy who coached Lance. Joe Friel wrote the book. We're going to be the people who write the software. And they started mapping out the software on a paper napkin at lunch, literally. And then, you know, went away from the meeting and then a few, you know, a few weeks or maybe several months later, I get an email from Hunter and they've got a few questions and they gradually started sharing, you know, Excel spreadsheets.
Pulled Me In, so it's Hunter's fault. It sucked me into this whole thing. But one of the early things they decided, totally independently, was if we throw time on a log axis, it helps better reveal the detail at shorter durations. Now, A.V. Hill did that way back in the 20s or 30s or whatever, so you can find plots from his classic papers that show the same thing, but Hunter and Kevin independently came to the same conclusion.
It does, though. It ends up being the average person. That's all they've ever seen. And they don't understand log blots. And so they think that your power goes like this. It's like, look, there's an option. Just click. Linear scale. It really goes kind of like this. Yeah, it really does look like just that large hyperbola. Which is one of the critical power.
models is to assume a rectangular hyperbola. Yeah, but that model has evolved so much. And I don't want to, you know, give away all the references for the, you know, the WQO5 model, but, you know, it evolved so much into something that really well, you know, mimics the human power curve. And then, you know, especially with cycling, but I assume most sports are similar. And then, you know, you really just made it fit the data so well.
And it's just been such an invaluable tool for coaching. And I don't think, like, I could still coach really well without it, but it makes, you know, tracking fitness so much easier. Yeah. And this was a point I made at many of the USA Cycling seminars, where I was, you know, giving the X-Phys 101 talk and trying to bring people up to speed. I was telling coaches,
You might think you really need to know a lot about exercise physiology to be a good coach, but the reality is you don't. As long as, you know, if you're walking in other people's footsteps with respect to the training aspect, and as a coach, you have to be, you know, a psychologist, you have to be a planner, you have to be a bike fitter, you wear so many hats. You could be a highly successful coach.
Without ever having a really deep understanding of exercise physiology. Now, if you want to stay on top of the most recent literature, or if you want to go beyond the tried and true, then the more you know about exercise physiology, the better. But yeah, at the end of the day, make more power.
I mean, I think getting into exercise physiology, I think a lot of people think it's either necessary or they're looking for shortcuts with the training. And the deeper I go into it, and I only graduated school in like 2014, so I'm not even as into it as long as you are. And even I'm going, you don't need to know all this stuff. You can really like...
You don't need to bridge the gap between all the literature and training methods, but once in a while, you know, we find something that's, you know, oh, wow, I didn't know this, so is this applicable to training? Yes, like when you tweeted my article about your training too hard for criteriums showing the aerobic resynthesis of creatine phosphate, I think a lot of people started taking me seriously that day, so thank you for that, by the way.
It shows that your opinion still has a lot of weight, but actually, now that I think about it, where have your tweets gone? I went looking for that the other day, and it was, do you tweet and delete? I have stepped away from the internet due to too many stalkers and call it changing job.
responsibilities. So again, I spent the vast majority of my career in medical school setting. I was fortunate enough to be a finalist for the Doc Councilman Sports Science Award from U.S. Olympic Committee. If I had won the award, I would have had lunch with President Bush at the time, right?
Nice honor, right? And I'm very grateful to Sam Callen for nominating me. At the time, though, I was working for Wash U, and they would have not cared one iota. I'm a PhD in a clinical environment. The only thing I'm good for, I mean, they're not going to let me teach doctors, right? If I were in the basic science department, yes, but if you're in a clinical department, no.
The only thing I'm good for is writing grants and generating indirect cost money. So, you know, I can do my professional thing and then I can run my mouth on the web on the side. And, you know, it's kind of like different worlds, right? Yeah. But then when I came here to IUPUI, you know, you start finding, you know, students in your classes that know of you from your online presence, etc.
And it starts getting a little too close to home. So I figured the safest thing would be to just shut all of that down. So you didn't shut it down necessarily because it was becoming a pain in the ass to argue with so many trolls online. And also I'm sure there were a lot of nice folks out there too. Or was that part of it, do you think? Like this is an easy excuse to just step away. Yeah.
Yeah, you burn out arguing with the trolls, I guess. Didn't take me that long. You do have some endurance. Yeah. 30, 40. I don't know what that says about me. But it was more of a...
Pragmatic than an emotional decision, I would say, if that makes sense. There wasn't really any upside to continuing to maintain a presence online. Do you think there's value in it for some exercise physiologists?
Yeah, I can barely go like three clicks without seeing Steven Seiler or Keith Barr. And, you know, not to say that that's a bad thing, because I really like the kind of stuff they put out. You know, do you see that as a benefit or a detriment? Well, the younger folk, now see I'm aging myself, they truly believe in the importance of a social media presence as a scientist.
There are data out there to suggest that, you know, papers that get tweeted more, get cited more, etc. If you go to the American College of Sports Medicine meetings, they'll run separate talks, clinics on, you know, how to handle this as a young person. But if you view, the analogy is often presented, you know, science is this great big edifice.
A single paper is simply a brick in that edifice, and maybe it's the keystone of an archway, and maybe it's, you know, the paper you published is, you know, the part of the foundation of something that never was built, right? That's for history to judge. So, as a scientist, I simply want to do the best work that I can, you know, pay the bills, scratch my intellectual itch, be proud of what I've contributed, and, you know, let...
Time Decide, Whether It Was Valuable or Not Valuable. Well, lucky for you, you've written that history a couple times now. And in that context, tweeting about your research, giving TED Talks, I mean, it varies with country as well, but as you know, the system here in the U.S. is built around NIH dollars.
And the only person I know who is a highly successful NIH-funded scientist who also maintains a very prominent web presence is Mike Joyner. But that's because this is a guy who must have boundless energy, right? And then, again, coupled with the fact that most of my career has been in the med school setting, it's all about getting funding.
So I look at my own CV and it's like, okay, great, you published some papers, but the thing that I'm most proud of actually is I did my job, I met the job expectations by staying funded. Because that's what I needed to do, what I had to do, what I was expected to do. And it's the saying in the medical school environment is an NIH dollar is worth $2. It's $1 to spend and then it's $1 a prestige kind of thing. Oh, yeah.
So being in the medical school world, like being at Wash U, one of the top medical schools in the world, it's like, did I ever interact with anybody with an IQ of less than 120? You're around really smart people all the time. They walk in the door and they have their wall with their 23 Nobel Prize winners or whatever. It's like, okay, I know my place. I'm just somebody off studying exercise because I got interested in high school.
But swimming with the sharks, you got to survive. I'm proud that I survived. I mean, no easy feat, for sure. I mean, back when I was in school, I was in class, my Biochem 2 class was with Hans Kornberg.
You know, just a huge intellect and just a massive presence. And I was, I'm like in awe of this guy day one. I'm like, oh my God, I'm so excited. And I thought, man, I want to do research like this guy. Then I asked one of my professors, like, what's it like to do this? And they explained the whole thing. And I was like, I think I'm just going to be a lab rat or I'm just going to keep riding my bike or I don't think this is for me. It's a tough world. Yeah. If research were easy, everybody'd be doing it. True. Yes. Yeah. I mean,
I mean, the best that, you know, us coaches have is like, you know, we can get a, we can get a Moxie or we can get a VO2 master and do our own little experiments on, does this training intervention work better than this one? And I think that- Yeah, that is interesting how, you know, technology is evolving things, the stuff that the people back in the, you know, the early part of the 20th century had to spend, you know.
days and hours to collect the data. Nowadays, you have basically the Star Trek tricorder and you hold it up and you get it instantaneously. It doesn't mean we're any smarter now. We just have more convenient tools. We can go faster. The other thing that I think that many people don't appreciate is how much variation there is from one country to another. There are very few people I know in exercise physiology
in a medical school setting, just because of the way things are structured. And there's very little funding to do through applied sports science type research. Whereas in the heyday of the Australian Institute of Sport, you had people like Louise Burke, John Hawley, Dave Martin, et cetera, getting funding from the...
Australian Government, in order to study elite athletes, try and win Olympic medals. The Canadian funding system, it's more, I mean, your ideas matter, and the importance of your ideas matter, but your pedigree also matters. So if you're trained in the right labs, once you get on the bandwagon, you're still on the bandwagon. And then Europe is different as well. So I think
Everybody has to operate within the environment and yet the average consumer of this information doesn't necessarily realize how the world revolves. Yeah, I mean, yeah, the world of cycling coaching is very different from the academic world and I think that's a good thing sometimes and I think also that's a bad thing sometimes because, you know, you can...
You can do some great advertising and put some really weird ideas out there, and people are going to go, oh, cool, I'll spend money on that. This is going to be the secret that gets me from a 250-watt Cat 4 to a 450-watt WorldTour Pro, for sure. VLA Max. No, wait, no. You said it. Let the record show that I only planned to say it.
So I was actually going to ask you a bit more about the history of exercise physiology, but I think now that we brought up VLA Max, why don't we just dig into this one? Okay, do you, all right, here's the obvious question, and then we'll go deeper. Do you think that VLA Max has an effect on your FTP? No.
See, you're having the same thoughts I am, like fiber type and... You got it, glycolytic enzyme activity, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, yeah. Well, as you know, VLA max is presented as the corollary to VO2 max, the anaerobic equivalent of VO2 max. In theory, there is some maximal rate of lactate accumulation, maximal rate of...
Glycogenolitis, or Glycolysis that you can hit, generate, achieve, or whatever. And the balance of that and your aerobic abilities dictates your maximal metabolic steady state. Yeah, obviously, muscle fiber type distribution via its impact upon your inherent glycolytic, glycogenolytic enzyme activities and mitochondrial respiratory capacity was going to
Correlate with, you know, maximal sustainable intensity. But VLA Max itself isn't really a thing, as you know. I'm telling you stuff you already know, right? Well, it's something frequently put out on social media. And, you know, they've got, I don't want to talk too much out of school, but like there are backdoor deals that they have with folks to like, oh, don't talk about us, you know. So I have a free platform. I can't get fired.
Except for my coaching clients, so I can say whatever I want. I actually gave an exam to my students last night, and this was one of the bonus questions. It was about VLA Max. To see if they could see the limitations to the idea. There are pragmatic issues. You did a 15-second sprint, and you measured lactate before, and when it peaked afterwards,
Make assumptions about the volume of distribution of lactate, and you divide by 15 to calculate a rate. Well, if those assumptions are wrong, your rate is off, etc. But the bigger issue I have is really more the core concept, and this is summed up in my pithy power proverb that I've seen you try to correct my grammar, but I like mine better. And that is that lactate production doesn't blow, it sucks. As you said, it's actually, it is sucked.
Yeah. Right. But to say that it sucks resonates more with people, I think. It does, because it's got that same balance like VO2 max, VOA max, you know, it's catchy. Yeah. But the reality is, I mean, if you think about it practically, right, as I always tell students, muscle is a unique tissue in that it can increase its demand for ATP.
You know, a hundred, maybe a thousand fold in milliseconds. And therefore, we have to have robust, redundant mechanisms for resupplying ATP or the muscle is going to go into rigor. And in point of fact, it's very difficult to demonstrate any significant decline in ATP levels in skeletal muscle.
The 1920s, when everybody realized that ATP was the source of energy-driving muscle contraction, A.V. Hill, circa World War II, issued his challenge to biochemists saying, okay, we all agree this is true, but nobody's actually demonstrated ATP being used. And it wasn't until Kane and Davies in the 50s were able to poison creatin kinase with iodoacetate that they were able to demonstrate a decrease in ATP.
So these robust, redundant systems actually do a fantastic job of defending our ATP levels. They have to. Okay. Well, what if you truly did hit your maximum rate of lactate production? I mean... You wouldn't be providing ATP and your ATP levels would plummet, right? Yeah. That doesn't happen. Yeah. Therefore...
There has to be some reserve, right? I have looked back, Larry Spreet, in measuring the activity of glycogen phosphorylase and PFK, et cetera, in human muscle. Perhaps during, you know, very high intensity, small muscle mass exercise, you might approach the maximal rate of those enzymes in vivo, but not during whole body exercise.
So it's not, it's a VLA peak, not a VLA max, and it's not determined by the size of the pipes, it's determined by the suction from below, right? So the more rapidly you hydrolyze ATP, the more rapidly you'll make lactate. So if you have a lot of fast-twitch fibers, your VLA max will be higher, right?
But again, lactate production doesn't blow. It sucks. It is sucked. So the core concept of VLA Max is wrong. So why not just measure somebody's 15-second sprint power and be done with it? You don't have to wrap it in this pseudo-scientific concepts and confuse people, unless you want to try and make money off the idea. I mean, I honestly cannot blame...
people for that. I mean, well, why don't we, well, because I think the order of operations here is actually critical, because I've, I don't think I've actually been through this on my podcast. I was just recently interviewed for somebody else's, and he asked me the same question, you know, I went through the whole thing. So, so let's start with muscle contraction happens, or actually, let's start with like the signal for muscle contraction.
and the steps to make lactate and then where, you know, and then I guess like showing the order for operation and why, you know, you can change how quickly you make lactate and how that's not going to really affect your threshold. Yeah.
Where to begin? All right, so depolarization of the alpha motor neuron releases acetylcholine, which diffuses across the synaptic cleft, leads to depolarization of the muscle cell membrane, the sarcolemma. That wave of depolarization spreads over the sarcolemma, down the T-tubules, where there is an electrical to mechanical to electrical signal transduction activation of the dihydropyridine receptor, basically.
Punches its next-door neighbor, the ryanidine receptor. Ryanidine receptor opens, releases calcium into the cell. There's a spike in calcium, which signals muscle contraction. In the process, though, it also activates pathways of ATP production via, for example, calcium activates glycogen phosphorylase.
Right. So the rate of
Phosphocreatine Hydrolysis, and the rate of glycogenolysis, glycolysis, and the rate of aerobic AT production are all intimately linked to the rate of ATP utilization. Right. It's based on the rate of demand. And if we do something, this is my example, if we just sprint a little harder, like if we do like...
you know like a muscle activation exercise like we do a heavy squat and then you know a few minutes later we go do a sprint for more power we have now increased our rate of lactate production and we haven't changed anything metabolically right right enzyme activities haven't changed you just turned them on more because you needed more ATP yeah
And I saw an experiment where they isolated all the enzymes of glycolysis and they measured the ex vivo maximal rate of lactate production and we will never get close. We'd need a 20,000 watt sprint to even get close to something like that. Well, like I said, digging around, you know, of course, measuring enzyme activities ex vivo and trying to estimate their true in vitro activity, in vivo activity is a challenge. Like I said, I found one paper from Larry Spreet where he was calculating.
that perhaps during small muscle mass exercise, you were using 85% of your capacity. But that still means you have a 15% reserve. And again, small muscle mass, not large muscle mass. Yeah. So, okay, here's the next follow-up question. It's because when we look at the VLA-MAX model at FTP, at threshold, that maximum lactate steady state, it always shows 100% carbohydrate utilization. Is this true?
No. Right. Yeah, you probably don't have 100% carbohydrate utilization necessarily even at VO2 max. And then outside the construct of whole body exercise in rat muscle, for example, if you take a rat muscle and you stimulate it to contract maximally, what percentage of whole body VO2 max is it operating at? It's like, we don't know, but it's...
Chewing through ATP as quickly as it possibly can, right? Again, Larry Spreet has done studies back in the day where even in those circumstances, you do see some utilization of intramuscular triglycerides. So it's unlikely that it's ever going to be 100.000%. I mean, you can certainly bias things heavily toward carbohydrate or heavily toward fat by defining the exercise conditions.
Again, even at VO2 max, you're not necessarily 100.00%. And of course, most people's sustainable exercise intensity is well below. Average cyclist, probably about 80% of their VO2 max. Yeah. Well, at one of our last podcasts where we did the real technical in-depth stuff, one of the things that we were looking at was the many things that limit TTE.
And one of them I said was fuel utilization, because if you're using carbohydrates, your glycogen stores at a lower rate because you're using more fats, you should have a longer TTE. And one of the things that I've actually been surprised about, because you mentioned this earlier about being well-trained and probably having a longer TTE, because I've seen, you know, some of my clients have gone like, you know,
80, 83 minutes is the longest one I've seen. I've been the shortest one I've ever seen, 30 minutes. And I violated the one millimole thing for MLSS. I was actually at two millimole or something like that, because I do know of a training. I just sprint. And one of the things that I've seen in world tour power data is
really short TTEs, which has actually shocked me, because I expected them to be really long, based on what you had mentioned and what, like, you know, Dean Golich had mentioned. And I've seen them around, like, 35 minutes, 40 minutes, when I was expecting, like, 60, 70. Yeah. I developed the WK04 model, which they've now altered. I like the 4 better, by the way. Yeah, well.
Statistically, I think I know what they changed in five, and statistically four is a better model. Sorry, Tim. He knows, he knows. I view, there's the concept of time to exhaustion at maximal metabolic steady state, right? And then there is the parameter in
the WKO Mathematical Modeling. There's sort of two different things. Or the parameter in the model is an attempt to operationalize the concept. How do we estimate? But I really view TTE in that model as more of a fitting parameter.
Call it if you will, it's a fudge factor that makes the model fit better. Einstein's done the same, can't blame you. And it isn't necessarily a reliable estimate of your true time to exhaustion. And that's why, if you go back to the original webinars that I did, and if you had a version of WK04 in the first six months or so that it was out,
The program did not report TTE. I remember that, yeah. Because I didn't trust it, right? And then for pedagogical reasons, the powers that be decided that reporting TTE was a good thing. And so the program was changed and puts the number out there. But I wouldn't necessarily, you know.
Put a lot of faith. Collect a bunch of cyclists, take their spontaneous power data, plug them into the model, take their TTEs estimated from the model, now bring them into the laboratory and have them ride at the MFTP power output as long as they can. I wouldn't necessarily expect a really good correlation. So you think it's more of just based on the data that they have rather than an actual physiological capacity? That certainly is a driver.
Hunter Allen popularized the 20-minute test, and therefore you often see a drop-off in people's power duration data, and therefore the model says, oh, your time to exhaustion is somewhere just beyond 20 minutes, right? Yes, I see that all the time. It's a function of what you've done, you know? Yeah. Now, with all of that said, it is true that...
The fitter you are, the longer you can maintain maximal metabolic steady state. That was evident when I first grew up in Coyle's lab. And then more recently, there was a paper just published where they're talking explicitly about TTE and FTP and these concepts. And they took a bunch of cyclists of differing ability.
did what I described, and on average, time of exhaustion is longer in the fitter cyclist than in the less fit cyclist, and it's around how long it would take most people to ride 40k. Like, so, yeah, it was right after all, you know? I mean, it's, I'm joking, everybody. No, he brushed the dirt off his shoulder. You should have seen it on video. It's, it's as plain as the nose on your face kind of knowledge.
if you have been steeped in exercise physiology as long as I have been. One of the real-world things that I see in coaching that I didn't expect when I first started thinking about TTE and FTP and VO2max and all that is a lot of the time I'll see TTE go out before we get an FTP bump. A lot of the time if somebody's TTE is too long and if they're doing threshold intervals like 2x40 is where they start,
You know, it's like, oh, this is ridiculous. You got to raise the roof. And then TTE shortens. I mean, would you expect a relationship like that based on what you're aware of? It's hard to separate those observations from how coaching is prescribed and what people actually do. I mean, your power duration data are a description of the best that you've ever done.
Which isn't necessarily the best that you can do. So if you are trying to push up FTP from below and people are often prescribing longer and longer efforts, well, it's going to drag that parameter out. And then finally the person has a breakthrough or they have a race or whatever, and then all of a sudden they push the curve up. And it isn't necessarily.
Changes in their physiology. It's more what they've actually done and how you're extracting those parameters using a mathematical model. The other sort of consideration, though, is that time to exhaustion, how long you can sustain something versus how hard you can go could have different physiological determinants.
One of the points I always make, you know, many people are interested, what causes fatigue? You know, I beat it into my undergraduate's head, you know, the answer to that question is fatigue is always multifactorial. It's, you know, it's not just one thing. So it's like, okay, well, what determines how long you can go at maximal metabolic steady state? You know, your muscle glycogen concentration, your bulk muscle glycogen concentration is only going to drop by, you know.
50%. It's only a drop by roughly half. So you can't really say that glycogen depletion is a cause of fatigue. But it could be that, you know, the initially recruited Type I fibers, the ones that you like to use the most, they might become glycogen depleted, right? And then, you know, as they start to drop out or being used less frequently, because they're not...
Living Up to the Demands Placed Upon Them. Your central nervous system starts recruiting higher Henneman-sized threshold motor units, working your way up, and maybe at the end you're recruiting fast-twitch fibers that you don't use very often, and they're not very aerobically trained, and then they fatigue due to changes in high energy phosphate levels or whatever.
And then it's like, okay, well, I trained, and as a result of training, I store more glycogen, you know. There's so many different factors in this time window of performance that influence it, that how long you can go and how hard you can go, at least potentially have different determinants. So it depends, like everything else.
That was Sam Callen's always complaint. You know, you ask an exercise physiologist a question, and it's like, well, their answer is always, well, it depends. And that's, you know, that's the reality. I was like, I have, I'm teaching a graduate exercise physiology course right now. All master's students, my one doctoral student in there, and I kind of warned them that, okay, all the things you learned in undergrad, you know, many of them came from within our own program, we lied to you.
We painted it as very black and white. And the reality is it's more complicated. So, you know, hold on to your hats, folks. This is where it's going to go. I'll throw one at you. Mitchell's chemo-osmotic theory, right? Won the Nobel Prize for working out high mitochondria synthesize ATP. Came across a recent paper where there's an entire parallel system to the cytochromes that are involved in pumping potassium across the inner mitochondrial membrane.
And the concentration gradient for potassium is so much larger than for hydrogen ions. The argument of these biochemists is that it's actually the potassium gradient that's primarily responsible for driving ATP synthesis, not the proton gradient. Mitchell won the Nobel Prize for working that out, right? We all learned it. We all understand it. It's textbook-level knowledge.
Guess what? It might be more complicated than that. Yeah, I thought the last piece of the puzzle was which way do the hydrogen ions go around complex five? Like, do they go the short way or do they go the long way? I thought that was the last piece of the puzzle. No, I'll send you that paper. It's a group that apparently has been working on this idea for a while. It has like an accompanying... There's another group that claimed that they'd already discovered the idea, and then there's a response to that.
Lengthy Letter to the Editor saying, no, the only thing your original idea and our current hypothesis have in common is that they both involve potassium and hydrogen. So there's actually three papers that you can read together in your spare time. Yeah, well, I mean, because it's, I mean, I've got to brush up on my physics and all that stuff, but like, you know, it seems like a larger just electrical gradient might help with the driving of, I don't know, I got to read it.
Something like that. Another example of that nearer and dearer to my own research and one that I've sort of awoken to more recently. Have you heard of the super relaxed state of Myosin? No, I have not. Okay. So in resting skeletal muscle, most of the Myosin cross bridges are laid all the way back against the filament itself, you know, with the heads following a helical.
Every 43 nanometers, etc. This is the so-called super relaxed state of Myosin. But when you put tension on the Myosin filament, they move away from the center of that Myosin filament, board Myosin, in proportion to the tension that's placed upon them. This is referred to as mechanosensing.
Oh. Yeah, you may have heard that term. Yeah. So, when you go and, you know, you talk about its calcium release, we turn on the thin filament. Well, it's really more like muscle is off. So, the thin filament is not activated and myosin's in its super relaxed state. Then calcium actually moves the thin filament from the...
Off-State to like the ready state of muscle as a whole. Right. And then the myosin filament itself has to turn on. And in resting muscle, there may only be, you know, one or two percent of cross bridges that are not in the super relaxed state, but they're actually bound to myosin. And they may, sorry, bound to actin. And they may serve as sentinels.
So that if the filaments start to slide past one another, it puts tension on the Myosin filament, and therefore you start recruiting more and more cross bridges in proportion to the force that's needed, mechanosensing. Interesting. It's hypothesized that this evolved as a way of conserving energy. Muscle has this enormous capability to alter its metabolic rate. If you turn on your muscle all the time, you know.
You can shiver and warm yourself up on a cold day, or if you unfortunately have the wrong genes and you undergo surgery, you have a bad reaction to anesthesia, you can have malignant hyperthermia that kills you because you're hydrolyzing ATP too rapidly in your muscles, right? So we need to keep the muscle turned off except when we want to turn it on, right? So it's been proposed that this super relaxed state evolved to serve that need.
thought process, because I was just thinking of costumers the whole time like everybody else. Yeah, it's, now, okay, how do we apply that to coaching theory? That was my next question. Actually, let me ask you a question that has, that may or may not have more applicability to regular coaching theory is, why does FTP occur? Ultimately, you need to balance
ATP utilization with ATP production. And that ATP production is, I'll say, most safely derived from aerobic pathways, right? If you increase ATP demand too much and you cannot meet it with aerobic ATP production, then you get additional
Exponential Stimulation of Glycogenolysis, etc. Which leads to the accumulation of lactate. Yeah, and lactate itself is not necessarily a cause of fatigue, but protons associated with lactate production may play a role. It's also such an intricate web, again, what I was trying to emphasize to my students in this grad class.
You know, we think of these three energy systems, but they are so intertwined that, you know, they're all three start right at the onset of exercise. And, you know, if you suck too hard, you're going to lower your fossil creatine stores more. You're going to activate glycogenolysis more. If it's a prolonged exercise, you know, maybe you'll run out of glycogen as a result. But if you're instead talking about...
I'm going as hard as I can, and I want to go a little bit harder, right? I wanted to, you know, I tried to break the 50-plus record at Moriarty, you know. I was on it until the turnaround and then realized that...
I had a tailwind. So I was like, okay, I got to go harder. Well, why can't I go harder? Because I start sucking ATP too rapidly, and I alter high energy phosphate levels, the energetic state of the cell, a little bit of ADP starts to develop ADP, then inhibits every ATPase, and I got to back back down again. But ultimately, it's a matter of balancing aerobic ATP production to ATP demand.
More mitochondria, good thing. More capillaries, good thing, right? Do you think that there's like a central governor kind of role in something like that? That is one area that our understanding of fatigue has certainly expanded. Even back when I was doing my dissertation where we were looking at hypoglycemia as a cause of fatigue, we would discuss the role of the central nervous system and we attempted to get at that. We were doing integrated EMG activity.
Early, and then at the point of fatigue, and at the point of fatigue, your cadence is lower, so we'd have to have people drop their cadence early, and it got to be too much of an add-on to the core of my dissertation, so we dropped it. The saying I had back then, aside from fatigue is always multifactorial, is that on the Borg scale, fatigue is when your perceived exertion hits 18.
Right? Yeah. You're trying to generate as much central motor drive as you possibly can in order to continue in the context of all sorts of noxious peripheral feedback, right? Noxious. And, you know, if somebody is at the point of fatigue and you suddenly, you know, flash $1,000 at them, they might be able to keep going for another 30, 45 seconds, right? Because they were able to raise central motor drive a little bit more. Yeah.
High levels of central motor drive are needed has been around for, you know, how long has it been since I did my dissertation or before? What has changed is now we have all sorts of tools, transcranial magnetic stimulation, et cetera, to try and tear the system apart. And it does seem that there are, you know, multiple steps in the chain that at the intensity you maintain for a 40KTT that are all tending to fail.
You know, in exercise physiology and exercise physiologists, we think a lot about the muscle. The motor control people think all about the brain and like never the twain shall meet, right? But, you know, if you do a Wingate test, yeah, it's, you know, let's think about the muscle, you know, but clearly there can be central issues. And it's not so much, again, it's not, it's not the central motor drive.
Decreases, it's more that central motor drive doesn't increase enough to be able to keep going. There's a, again, now, probably two decades old, but I think it was Nels Secker, S-E-C-H-E-R, wrote a kind of editorial paper on it, and I think the title is something like, Exercise Begins and Ends in the Brain.
Interesting, yeah. Voluntary exercise requires the central nervous system. We have to choose to exercise, right? Yeah, we can't hook everybody up to a car battery every experiment, right? Yeah, yeah. So it's always been there, but it's often maybe slighted in terms of the attention that's devoted to it. I mean, I think that that is actually something that I've been using in coaching a lot lately is
you know, in the description of like what, you know, something like, you know, LT1 or LT2 should feel like, you know, I tell them like, this should feel here, you should not feel yourself needing to concentrate harder to push harder, stuff like that. To bring it back, is this inter-threaduality? But you were asking about application of power to other sports and I was saying that being a cyclist made it easier for me because I could intuitively relate to power data, etc.
My original contribution was the power-based training levels triggered by a chance conversation on the infield at T-Town with John Verhul. And so it's like, okay, I'm going to construct power-based training levels. One of the things I came across was Chris Boardman's coach, Peter Keens, has had his training levels.
and associated with those were verbal descriptions. And I could read the verbal descriptions and I could really relate to his training levels. And so I borrowed the idea of a verbal description from Peter Keen and I adopted, stole the word levels because he described them as levels. And another pithy power proverb, right? They're called levels and not zones for a reason.
You know, people are, they're into zone-based training. Oh, I got to keep my power in a certain zone. Oh, I'm coming to the base of the hill. I better go slower. Oh, I can't go out of zone two. I better get off and walk. I might burst my little nascent capillaries, you know? And if you train like that, it's like you become a triathlete, right? You're a diesel. This is not how to ride a bike. All you do is you make your training less specific. So it's like, okay, how do we get people not to think about zones? I know, let's call them levels.
Well, that's sort of like inventing another definition of a way to interpret a lactate curve from a RAM test. Yeah. I mean, because I can easily see why people would misinterpret that over the years as intending to be descriptive. And the number of people where I tell them like,
Pay attention to your RPE. Most of the training I give people now is more RPE-based than power-based, except for around threshold. It seems to work super, super well, because it keeps people really in touch with their legs, instead of like, oh, what does the motor learning algorithm tell me I should do today? At what percentage of FTP should I X, Y, Z?
For context, like the Performance Manager and TSS and Trimp, are you familiar with Session RPE? Yes. So Carl Foster's idea, for the benefit of your audience, Carl Foster's idea for, let's say, team sports or whatever is 30 minutes after the practice of the workout, you ask the question posed to the athlete by their mom, say, is, honey, how was your workout? And they rate it on a...
Ten Point Scale, like the Ten Point Borg Scale, multiply it by a duration, session RPE. I've often thought that that would be a very useful paradigm to use in that, you know, for if you want to prescribe. But even to collect that sort of data on your athletes and, you know, look at that in the context of their power, because if the
Power is abnormally low for the perceived effort, or if the perceived effort is abnormally high for the power, well, it's in a red flag. And then it's like, okay, so did you have a fight with your girlfriend? Didn't sleep last night? What's been going on with you, right? Yeah, 100%. I mean, well, since TrainingPeaks implemented RPE and the emojis, although I have some older clients who are like, I don't know what to do with the emojis. I'm like, fine, leave it. Just do the RPE. I've never used TrainingPeaks.
But we did talk about, in the original WKO days, before WKO 4 even, that that should be part of the program, is to collect that data. Yeah, well, we have it now, and it is super, super valuable. Between that, heart rate, power, and athlete comments, I tell people, you shouldn't overemphasize any one thing.
You know, people overemphasizing like, oh, what was my lactate value today? I'm like, you don't have to ride with a lactate meter. You're not Peter Atiyah, or however you pronounce his name? No, I'm not. Measure my lactate every single workout. Oh, what was I about to ask you? Well, actually, speaking of misinterpretations, do you have any of your work that you think has been
over-misinterpreted, and is there a record that you want to correct, or have people generally been fairly understanding of things? Oh, well, you know, everyone's a critic, so I wouldn't say they've been generally understanding of things. Is there a particularly common myth? You know, the fact that people think that FTP is 60-minute power,
While it demonstrates a lack of understanding, I don't know if it necessarily has a huge impact on the actual application of the idea. So I don't know if that would be one. We talked about TTE.
I'm going to volunteer one from one of my very favorite papers, which was you and Ed Coyle and two other authors who I always forget. Are we talking science or are we talking about hobby? Take your pick. We can do both. Okay, because you're bringing up papers, so now we're talking science. Oh, all your work, everything you've done. Oh, in the scientific realm, back in 1992, we published the second ever paper.
to utilize 31-phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy to look at muscle metabolism in the context of aging. And that area has been mined repeatedly, and yet some scientists who work in that area, have worked in that area for the last 10, even 15 years, never cite our original paper. So, yeah, it's typical science. It's complaining. People don't cite you, right?
So that one I think is underappreciated. But that's about the only one that first comes to mind. Because I always think about this because I've read so much great research from the 70s, 80s, and 90s. And your name is on probably 25, 30% of those papers. How much stuff do you see these days where you think, we did that already, we know?
We did this paper that nobody pays attention to. A lot of it, yeah. You started off by talking about the chapter I wrote with Dave Kostel. I was always a fan of history. My dissertation was based on class experiments by Christensen and Hansen that were published. They weren't published until 1939, but they were actually done in the 1920s. And they were published in German.
Looking at the role of carbohydrate and carbohydrate diets and hypoglycemia and fatigue. It's a series of like six papers. Classic studies. So in the carbohydrate feeding world, everybody used to cite them, including Ed Coyle, my PhD mentor. And I felt as a PhD student, it's like, if I'm going to base my dissertation on these ideas that you've told me about, I'd kind of like want to read the papers myself, right?
And so I started haunting the archival library at the University of Texas, and I delved into the old literature, you know, reading A.V. Hill's papers, et cetera, to the point that it had these big movable stacks, right? And you weren't supposed to go back there because you might get crushed, but the librarians knew me well enough, they trusted me, I'd go out and, you know, go back where they were so I could pull down dusty old journals.
So I asked Ed if we could get somebody to translate these papers from German and he wouldn't pay for it. So I paid a German graduate student to translate them for me. And then I gave Ed and John Ivey and a couple other faculty members copies of that translation. That was my Christmas gift to them. And it turns out that they misunderstood the experimental design. And it was back to that telephone game.
Yeah. Right? They'd never read the original papers, and they didn't understand it. So I'm always, yeah, we're looping back on the conversation here, it's like, always consult the original source. Yeah. Right? Well, because the history, I find exercise physiology and cycling to be, you know, both things where tradition and history has a large deal of inertia.
You know, and like, you know, the UCI is mandating, you know, the bikes have to look like this, double triangle design, you can't have your socks this high, because, you know, imagine if everybody used to wear knee socks, like, now it would be like, you can't have a sock below this level, you know? Yeah. And you go back and you can find patents from the 1880s on disc wheels made out of wood. Yeah. There is no, there are no new ideas under the sun. But yeah, I do think there's a lot to be said for, you know, knowing what has been,
done before, and that requires reading widely and going back. Nowadays, we get so lazy because we can call it journals electronically. I had a lot of fun writing the original chapter for Kipton's book that then led to this subsequent chapter, in part because it gave me an excuse to indulge my interest in the history of the field, in part because it was a totally different style of writing.
to write a history versus writing a scientific paper. But even I learned things in the process. Until I did that, I didn't realize. So there was controversy prior to 1900 as to whether muscle could only use carbohydrate or could use both carbohydrate and fat. Eventually, it kind of settled down to by, you know, the 20s or 30s. Everybody's like, yeah, okay, it can use a mixture of the two fuels.
But what fat is being oxidized? People did not know that free fatty acids or non-esterified fatty acids existed back then. Right. They thought it was all ketone bodies for a bit. Yep. Yeah, that was what I did not know. So ketones had their brief moment in the sun from like 1932 to, you know, the post.
World War II nuclear era, when people started doing studies with 14C fatty acids, they finally realized that they weren't simply an artifact of lipid extraction from plasma or tissue, but they were a real thing. But yeah, for a while, they're ketones. People thought ketones were. But you wouldn't know that. They made the resurgence. Yeah.
Exogenously, right? Exogenously, yeah. Muscle loves ketones. It will oxidize, and the heart. They love ketones. It will oxidize quite readily. Oh, it's so simple. They just stuff them right in there. But there's just normally not that many of them around. Right. Yeah, because why would there be? If you've got those endogenously, you're probably very hungry. Yeah.
Speaking of strange historical things, have you ever seen some of the early schematics for how people thought just basic energy metabolism happened? Because this was in the first tome of the Hans Krebs biography. It was like the original, like, oh, we know these like five or six...
Different Chemicals, and they were arranged in this way. These guys think they're arranged this way. These guys think that the liver does this. And, you know, it's like now that knowing what we know now, looking back, it's like, oh, wow, this is weird. But like, you know, like looking at how they did experiments and just, you know, how they could detect things. Like, I, you know, even though now we look back and I think, you know, we think, oh, man.
It's so simple now. The people who came before us weren't stupid. No. They just didn't have the tools that we have. There's in the notion of whether or not muscle uses intramuscular triglycerides, something that was also controversial for 100 years. A paper by Lifson, where they attempted to measure fatty acid uptake across the muscle, could detect it in some
Animals that they tested, not in others. And then they discussed how we can't rule out the possibility that you had basically simultaneous uptake and release. Yeah. They didn't have the tools to measure it.
But they recognized it was a possibility. And then people came along with isotopic tracers, and sure enough, you have simultaneous uptake and release going on, right? Well, that's one interpretation of such things. I've seen some interesting interpretations of lactate, you know, uptake and release. Well, yeah, lactate's a different one. So now you're getting into something. I am probably, I'll lay claim to the only person in the world who has actually accurately quantified
Lactate Kinetics Across Muscle During Exercise The problem with lactate is that it's produced intracellularly and it equilibrates rapidly but not instantaneously with pyruvate. And we can't infuse our tracer directly into the cell. So this ends up confounding the issues. When I was in Bob Wolf's lab, they developed a
A steady-state compartmental model to try and tease apart lactate and pyruvate kinetics. And it's simple algebra to solve it. You need arterial concentration and tracer activity or enrichment if it's stabilized to venous and tissue and flow. And it's like a mirror image of lactate and pyruvate on each other. And every interconnecting arrow, you can deduce the rate from these measurements.
There weren't a lot of applications to it. This was driven more by innate scientific curiosity and Wolf's brilliance, really, because he's a very bright guy. But very quickly, others there, Wolf probably mostly, realized that the same concepts could be applied to amino acid metabolism.
All of the research suddenly shifted to look at amino acid protein metabolism. And this is where Stu Phillips, who's in Canada, Kevin Tipton, recently deceased, but spent much of his career in Scotland, Arnie Ferrando, et cetera. All of what you would consider as some of the world's experts in exercise and protein metabolism, they were all postdocs there at the time when I was on the faculty. And so all of the research that they were doing shifted to applying this model. But it originated with lactate and pyruvate.
So I was trying to apply it, get funded to use it, and did one experiment, one participant, right? So I have a case study where we have teased those apart. Brooks is about the only one who ever used- I was about to ask you about Brooks.
Yeah, you're pushing buttons again, huh? I didn't mean to, I remember I emailed you a long time ago asking about something similar, and you said, by the way, check out, I think it was a Kent Sullen critique of that. I read it and I went, oh, my word. That letter to the editor to which Brooks never responded because there is no response, and it comes back to the fact that you can't differentiate between actual.
Transport, and Simple Exchange, except using this steady-state model. And I don't think it's something that Brooks even understands. I didn't say it. But I'll say it. I mean, you look at the scientific literature as a whole, step outside the context of exercise, you'll find very few people who use lactate tracer.
in kinetic studies. And that's because, yes, you can make measurements, yes, you can get numbers, but because of these issues, nobody really knows what they mean. And therefore, because they don't know what they mean, they don't measure it, right? Yeah. Brooks is the only one who's, you know, willing to walk out onto that plank, you know? Well, I mean, I think it also shows, you know, how much historical literature there is because, you know, Brooks is, you know, I've got what that, what's that?
Oh, my shelf. I used to have a bunch of books right here, but my shelf fell because there were too many, and now they're all on the floor. But I was about to pull out that exercise physiology tome that Brooks is one of the three authors on. And obviously, he's such a smart guy, and he knows so much, but the lactate shuttle concept, like the different ways that it can be interpreted, I think...
Even now, it shows how much historical inertia there can be around things that, you know, just... I saw a reference and, you know, like, let's think of the glucose fatty acid cycle named after somebody, right? The Warburg effect named after somebody. It was, you know, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle named after somebody. That's probably a better analogy. There was the somebody effect and the
Claim was that it's far easier to get an idea established in science than it is to disestablish it when it's wrong. And then you see it and it's like it's so true. I'll rant. We're working with dietary nitrate, beetroot juice, dietary nitrate improves muscle contractile function. Andy Jones is
The first person, wasn't the first person to actually study it in the context of exercise, but he jumped on the bandwagon with both feet really hard, right? So his Twitter handle is Andy Beetroot. Right, yeah, yeah, I've seen that one. He wrote a speculative review article for exercise and sports science reviews hypothesizing that dietary nitrate specifically benefits or targets type II fibers. And, you know, it's a plausible hypothesis. I wouldn't say it's a strong hypothesis.
My problem with it is that it's clearly not proven, right? And yet, if you go and read the scientific literature, this is a known fact, right? It's like, no, it's a hypothesis. And it's still a hypothesis. Yeah. Because I remember one of my athletes was tested last year sometime, and the doping control guy said, looked at the urine sample and was like,
Oh, you're the only person here who's like not taking beetroot juice. Oh, really? Yeah. So, who's on your Mount Rushmore of exercise physiology and you're not allowed to put yourself there? Not that I think you would, but we'll let history decide. How many people do I have to list? You get four. I get four. Okay. I haven't been around much for in a while, huh? John Holosey.
What is it with you podcast folks? You always like asking these questions. Glenn McConnell did this with Inside Exercise and stumped me as well. All right, actually, well, in that case, because, I mean, I think I understand. Can I put myself up there? Oh, you said I couldn't. Yeah, well, because I think, you know, it's like I used to be a musician and a recording engineer. And so if you ask me, like, who are my favorite musicians or my favorite bands, I would really, really struggle.
It would be like Miles Davis and Rolling Stones. I mean, you know. It's just too many. Yeah, it's way too many. So who do you think, who are you really enthusiastic about as a, you know, a current working exercise physiologist? I've always been interested in mechanisms.
And I've always been specifically interested in the human response to exercise. And I've always been interested in more metabolism, muscle function than, say, cardiovascular or environmental. So in that context would be people who are really trying to go after mechanisms in those areas.
I feel the same way, by the way. I have the same enthusiasm. Yeah. But, you know, there's so many young up-and-comers, bright people. And I tell a story about the late John Holisey, who trained more than 100 postdocs, just, you know, looms over the field of exercise physiology. And I was fortunate to be one of his trainees.
But there was one time where he proposed that we do a particular study, and I'm telling him, John, I think you've already done that one, haven't you? And you're thinking, like, is this guy losing it? And he used to keep all the, you know, the physical, the reprints back before computers, you know, three-ring binders, and, you know.
sleeves and this kind of thing. And he was a very slow-moving fellow. He pulls it down. He's like leafing through his 300 papers one by one. Can't find that paper anywhere. It turns out it was something that Jim Hagberg, who had been his right-hand man for a decade plus, had done. And John wisely realizing for Jim to advance in his career, Jim needed to publish without John's name on stuff.
And so, I associated it with, you know, Washu Applied Physiology, but John's name wasn't actually on it, so John had forgotten about it. But then, you know, he's kind of like caught out, he's embarrassed, and his comeback was something like, well, I can either read the literature, or I can write the literature, but I can't do both. So, I am not John Halsey, my accomplishments, you know.
are infinitesimal compared to his accomplishments, but I can relate to the eyes on the prize focus in that I've got a research coordinator who I have to fund. I have my summer salary I have to fund. I have graduate students I want to pay their stipends. I am hyper-focused on advancing my own work and getting the grants that...
Keep Everything Still Going. And I don't have a lot of time to indulge in what other people are doing. There was a time before I was at University of Texas Medical Branch, I was visiting. I think my physician had already been offered to me, but I was visiting. They were also interviewing a new head for the Gerontology Center. And so I'm sitting there with Bob Wolf, and Bob Wolf is looking through this fellow's CV, and he comes across a paper that...
Bob's name was on along with this potential head of the gerontology center. And then he's turning to his administrative assistant going, I don't remember this paper. Is this paper on my CV or whatever? And I'm thinking to myself, it's like, that's who I want to be. I want to have so many papers on my CV that I could lose track. It's like, yeah, I'm not there. I'm nowhere close to that. But at the same time, you think about it, it's like, you know.
Bobby is so busy with what he's doing now, he can't worry about what other people are doing. He can't even keep track of what he's done. Because you're so focused on what you're doing now.
You have to be, you know? I think that's a good thing for people, though, to be so involved in what they're doing that they kind of forget everything else. It's like, I'm so involved in coaching and, you know, doing the podcast that I have very little time. People ask me like, oh, what's your favorite podcast? I'm like, this one on cars. It's like, I don't really have the time and energy to really.
You know, delve into that kind of stuff. Because when I do, I pause it eight times. I do a lot of research and I'm like, I got other stuff to do. I can't really, I don't have time for this. Well, I'm not one for videos anyway. People don't talk quickly enough for me. So like if you had a written transcript of this, I wouldn't watch the video. I just read it. I don't have the patience for any video. The only exception might be a well done like home repair video.
We actually physically see, well, where is that screw that I need to turn and replace the part to fix my washer? You know, and of course, there's a million of those out there, and most of them are really low quality. That's the only time I ever look at a video. Otherwise, it's like, I'd rather read it. Okay, so unfortunately, after that, Andy had to go. We had kind of reached our time limit. He had stuff to do.
You know, he's already been in touch, we're already scheduling the second part of this, we're going to talk about more stuff that I want to talk about, and we're going to answer your list of questions, of course, so check out Instagram, Empirical Cycling, that's where I'm going to be asking four questions for Andy, and of course, I'm going to have to call them down a little bit, just a little bit, sorry everybody, obviously, and I cannot go short on anything, so that's okay, I think it's better that way.
If you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, please reach out to me directly, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. That is our ultimate Patreon, of course, but if you want to donate a couple bucks, empiricalcycling.com slash donate and up on the same website. We have some show notes, we've got some references, et cetera, et cetera. And thanks everybody for the ratings. Thanks everybody for sharing the podcast and thank you all for listening and we'll see you next time. Later.